# Brief Remarks at Fed Listens 2025: A conversation with New England Stakeholders — collins — 2025-05-20

Brief Remarks
Fed Listens 2025:
A conversation with New England Stakeholders
Susan M. Collins
President & Chief Executive Officer
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
May 20, 2025
Keene, New Hampshire
Federal Reserve Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Introductory Remarks
 Good morning. I’m Susan Collins, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, and it’s
my pleasure to welcome you to this Fed Listens session. Thank you for taking the time to join us
today. We’re especially pleased to be here in Keene, and I want to thank the Hannah Grimes
Center for hosting us. I am joined today by the Boston Fed’s first vice president, Karen Pennell,
as well as colleagues from our research, community development, and public affairs teams. I
also want to welcome our colleague Wendy Dunn from the Board of Governors in Washington.
All of us look forward to talking with you this morning.
 My comments will be brief, since we’re here to listen – not the other way around – and there
is quite a lot to cover during our time. But I’d like to start by giving you a bit of context about this
gathering.
About Fed Listens
 The Fed regularly reviews its monetary policy framework. These are the guiding principles
we use to achieve our two goals from Congress: price stability and maximum employment.  As
Chair Powell noted in remarks last week, “The structure of the economy evolves over time, and
monetary policymakers’ strategies, tools, and communications need to evolve with it. … A
framework should be robust to a broad range of conditions, but also needs to be updated
periodically as the economy and our understanding of it evolve.”1
 So these periodic reviews enable us to consider new information and changes in the
economic environment. The Fed Listens series is a critical part of these reviews. We began this
series a number of years ago, to expand the ways policymakers at our regional banks and the
Board of Governors in Washington hear from the people who make our economy work.2
 This spring, my colleagues from Reserve Banks around the country are holding events
similar to this one. Each is designed to gather perspectives, and to inform and help improve the
overarching guidelines we use in determining and setting appropriate monetary policy.
Ultimately, this allows us to better serve the American public and carry out our Congressionally
mandated responsibilities as the U.S. central bank - to achieve and sustain maximum
employment and price stability.
 I should note that we’ve taken a different approach for today’s event. In the past, we’ve
hosted Fed Listens gatherings at our office in downtown Boston. But this time, we wanted to
hold the conversation in the community. It’s something we prioritize at the Boston Fed: We try to
deepen our understanding of regional economic experiences by meeting face-to-face with
people across the six New England states.
 I’ve said this before, but our organization’s name – the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston – is
somewhat misleading, since we represent most of New England. Our Bank focuses on the First
1 See Opening remarks by Chair Powell at the Second Thomas Laubach Research Conference  p. 2.
2 For more, see Federal Reserve Board - Fed Listens.
District, which is one of 12 districts in the Federal Reserve System. The Fed is divided into
geographical areas so that as we consider changes to monetary policy, we know we’re engaged
with and hearing from diverse voices throughout the economy and across the country.
About today’s event
 Now, let me take a minute to talk about our time together this morning.
 Our goal today as Federal Reserve Bank leaders, is to deepen our understanding of the
challenges and opportunities facing your organizations, your communities, and our region. We
shared some questions with you in advance, so you know we’ll ask for your perspectives on a
few key topics, including how your firms and communities are being affected by inflation, labor
market conditions, and interest rate policy.
 The moderators at each table will help direct the conversation to the areas most pertinent to
the Fed’s framework review process. But please feel free to use the QR code or the paper
survey on your table to submit additional thoughts or questions on topics we may not have time
to cover.
 Lastly, I’ll point out that the participants around these tables reflect the breadth of the New
England region. Some of you are joining us from just down the street, while others traveled quite
a bit further. Whether we have met during past visits around northern New England or are
meeting for the first time, we very much look forward to your participation.
 So, with that, I’ll turn things back to Darcy, who has a few housekeeping notes, and then we
will start our roundtable discussions.
Closing remarks
 Let me close our gathering by offering my sincere thanks to our participants and
moderators. We greatly appreciate today’s robust discussions and the valuable insights you
have shared.
 I want to say just a few more things about how the insights we’ve gained today will advance
the Fed’s work. The Fed’s overarching mission is to foster conditions that support a vibrant
economy which works for everybody – not just some people. To do that, we need to connect
with and learn from people across our District about their experiences, challenges, and
opportunities.
 It’s fundamental for us to remember that the real-world experiences of people are behind
every data point we follow. Your input today complements what we learn from the statistics. It
provides a deeper understanding of the nuances of our complex New England economy. And it
informs the Fed’s approach to monetary policy and how we achieve our dual mandate: price
stability and maximum employment.
 Again, thank you for your participation and for your contributions to the Fed Listens
framework review. Both I and my team look forward to future opportunities to engage with you
all.
