# Regionalism at the Federal Reserve: Many Voices, One Purpose — daly — 2026-04-08

**Introduction**

Good morning and thank you for inviting me to southern Utah. I am delighted to be here and look forward to a lively conversation.

The Federal Reserve has been in the news these days. There are questions about Fed independence, the structure of the Federal Reserve System, and the accountability of Fed policymakers to elected officials and to the American people. But what most people want to know is whether they can trust the Federal Reserve.

Today, I will try to address these issues and describe how the structure of the Federal Reserve, designed by Congress over 100 years ago, had these very concerns in mind. They realized then what we know today: Trust starts with representation and accountability. And that's a key reason I'm here today.

**Origins: Regional, Independent, Accountable**

So, let's talk about the structure of the Fed. I'll start with representation. If you have been to Washington, D.C., or New York City, you know that the rest of the country looks different. Indeed, the United States is a vast array of people, economies, experiences, and sensibilities.

Congress saw this. Previous attempts to form a U.S. central bank had failed, in large part because they were centered around D.C. and New York, prioritizing Wall Street over Main Street.

The final attempt remedied this. In 1913, the Federal Reserve was created, reflecting national and regional interests and public and private-sector perspectives. These elements are evident in the Federal Reserve's structure and footprint. There is a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and 12 regional Reserve Banks. Together, the 12 regional banks, with their branches and operational locations, represent the United States.

The designers didn't stop there. They also recognized that, to be effective, the central bank had to be independent. One way independence shows through is in how monetary policymakers are selected. In D.C., members of the Board of Governors are nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate. They serve long and staggered terms to insulate them from undue influence of any given Administration. Reserve Bank presidents are chosen by their Bank's Board of Directors, honoring the commitment to regionalism and private-sector governance.

Finally, to ensure accountability, Congress set the Federal Reserve's mission and goals. It also kept the right to regularly review the Federal Reserve's performance. At the Reserve Banks, a private-sector Board of Directors oversees operations and, along with Reserve Bank leadership, is accountable to the Board of Governors.

Although the system has evolved over time, these principles remain: regionalism, independence, and accountability.

**The Federal Reserve in Practice**

That's how the Federal Reserve was formed, but what does it do? To understand that, we have to go back to 1913 and why Congress created a central bank—to quell financial panics and bank failures and ensure that the U.S. had a common currency, accepted anywhere in the nation. The solutions are reflected in the Fed's core responsibilities—managing payments, regulating and supervising banks, and conducting monetary policy.

Let's start with payments. The Federal Reserve processes around $5 trillion in payments each day and runs the key rails of payment services including cash, checks, ACH, instant payments, and wire transfers. Reserve Banks are responsible for most of these operations, ensuring efficiency, effectiveness, and resiliency across the nation.

A little-known fact is that the Federal Reserve manages cash distribution for the nation. It's a large-scale logistical operation, one where being near your customers matters. Each Federal Reserve District operates cash facilities. You have one here in Utah, at our branch office in Salt Lake City.

Another large component of our work is bank regulation and supervision. The Federal Reserve Board in Washington, D.C., and the Vice Chair for Supervision hold primary responsibility for this work. That said, many of the examination teams sit in regional Reserve Banks, leveraging local knowledge about economic conditions to better serve the banks in their communities.

The rest of our work focuses on monetary policy. And here, a diversity of views supports better outcomes. In practice, this means each Reserve Bank has its own research team. This helps guard against groupthink and ensures that the system is debating and challenging institutional norms and perspectives. Reserve Banks also provide centers of expertise that serve the entire system, for example, financial markets at the New York Fed, energy studies at the Dallas Fed, and emerging technologies at the San Francisco Fed, just to name a few.

Reserve Banks also rely on regional engagement teams, who meet regularly with local businesses, bankers, and community groups to gather real-time information about the economy. This has been one of the priorities of my presidency, putting people in the field to learn from the people we serve. Whether we are hosting roundtables, conducting surveys, or doing events like the one today, we are learning how the economy works in practice, not just in theory.

So, that's the Federal Reserve. Our work reflects our founding principles. And it has stood the test of time.

**The Responsibility to Evolve**

So, what does our future hold? As a longtime public servant, I know that public institutions are pillars of democracy. But to remain strong, they must evolve—ready to meet new challenges and allow for new possibilities.

The Federal Reserve is no exception.

In my 30 years at the Fed, I have seen—and led—a lot of change, including efforts to modernize and innovate our practices, processes, and operations. In each of these efforts, the motivations were the same: to be more efficient, more effective, and more resilient.

But we are never done. The world is always changing, and the Federal Reserve must change with it, always grounded in our principles—the ones that Congress established: to be regional in our work, independent in our thinking, and accountable to those we serve.

Thank you. I look forward to our discussion.
