# Staying Ahead of the Curve: Twenty-Five Years of Consumer Finance Excellence — paulson — 2025-11-06

Thank you, Bob,1 for that introduction. Good afternoon, everyone! I am delighted to
               welcome you to the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's 13th biennial conference on
               household finance and consumer payments.

               This year holds special significance because we are celebrating 25 years of the
               Consumer Finance Institute's leadership in consumer credit and payments research. I'm
               going to brag a little bit about the Consumer Finance Institute and talk about why its
               work is so important.

               But, before I do that, I need to remind you all that these are my own views and not
               necessarily those of any of my Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) colleagues or
               anyone else in the Federal Reserve System.

               Twenty-five years ago, when what became the Consumer Finance Institute was first
               established, the norm was to physically go to a bank branch to talk to a teller or to use
               an ATM. Virtually everyone paid monthly bills using checks and talked to a loan officer if
               they needed a mortgage. The idea of getting investment advice from social media or
               using a smartphone to pay for morning coffee was only a glimmer in the eye of the most
               ardent futurists.

               At that time, the Philadelphia Fed's region -- Delaware, the eastern two-thirds of
               Pennsylvania, along with Southern New Jersey -- was home to one of the largest PIN
               debit networks in the country. And Philadelphia Fed staff processed millions of checks
               from families paying monthly credit card bills.

               This made the Philly Fed a natural place to launch a center dedicated to advancing
               research on consumer credit and payments -- areas of critical importance to so many
               facets of the Fed's work.

               Over time, the consumer credit and payments landscape has changed a great deal, with
               technological advances driving new forms of payment and reshaping entire industries.

                  1 Robert Hunt, SVP and associate director, Consumer Finance Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
The Consumer Finance Institute has evolved to remain at the forefront of these
changes, work that has required more data-intensive strategies, new skills, and
increasingly greater computing resources.

In that evolution, the breadth of the Consumer Finance Institute expanded from a focus
on credit, debit, and prepaid cards to encompass virtually all forms of consumer credit
and most forms of payments -- old and new. What has stayed the same, however, is
the Institute's goal of better understanding how people earn, save, and invest and what
drives their decisions. Understanding this behavior is vital to understanding the
economy as a whole.

It's easy to see why. Consumer spending represents two-thirds of all economic activity.
And the decisions individuals and families make about how much to spend, how much
to borrow, and how much to save reflect many things -- including the resources that
they have today, how optimistic they are about the future, and potential frictions in
consumer credit markets.

Understanding consumer behavior helps me to better understand the broader economy
and is an important input into my thinking about monetary policy. When we achieve our
dual mandate goals of stable prices and maximum employment, it's easier for families to
plan and invest for the future and to make ends meet in the present. And, certainly, the
structure and efficiency of consumer credit markets impact the transmission of monetary
policy to the broader economy.

Consumer finance is central to the Federal Reserve System's major responsibilities --
not just to monetary policy. How people spend, save, and borrow is naturally influenced
by monetary policy. But consumer finance also reflects the stability of our financial and
payments systems, the efficacy of bank supervision, the enforcement of consumer
protection laws, and the Fed's work to promote community development efforts.

As the financial system and the payment system evolve, new products and services
become available, and others become less popular. Regardless of whether it's paying
for a meal using a debit card, or using buy-now, pay-later to do holiday shopping, or
investing in cryptocurrency, the Consumer Finance Institute team is on the frontlines
assessing the latest developments. And they're digging in to understand what they
might mean for the Fed with respect to our responsibilities for monetary policy, financial
stability, bank supervision, consumer compliance, community development, and the
payments system. But also -- and entwined with these responsibilities -- what new
developments mean for the well-being of households.

This conference encapsulates what the Institute does best: Bringing together
policymakers, regulators, researchers, and practitioners to deepen our knowledge and
expand our perspectives.

These conferences, and the ongoing conversations we have with many of you
throughout the year, also inform our own evolving research priorities. Ultimately, our
goal is to drive a deeper understanding of the financial decisions that families make so
we can strengthen the economy and improve people's lives.

There are a few key ingredients to the Consumer Finance Institute's success over the
years: collaboration, deep expertise, and innovation. The focus on innovation means
that the Institute is now using the latest machine learning and big data techniques.

I'd like to highlight a few examples of the team's recent work. In a study released last
December, Philly Fed researchers assembled a comprehensive data set on the financial
characteristics of higher education institutions and used machine learning models to
predict the probability of financial distress or closures among these institutions. 2
Consolidation in higher ed can pose challenges for individual institutions and their
communities as well as for students. The authors' work has not only helped to answer
important questions but also demonstrates the value of applying newer machine
learning tools as a complement to more traditional forecasting techniques.

I'd also like to note the Labor, Income, Finances, and Expectations (LIFE) Survey. The
LIFE Survey grew out of the consumer pulse survey that our team stood up at the
outset of the COVID-19 pandemic in an effort to stay on top of rapidly changing
consumer conditions during a very challenging time. The LIFE Survey has proven itself
to be a rigorous and nimble tool that provides a reliable gauge of consumers' economic
and financial experiences as well as their outlook for the future.

The LIFE Survey has been a tremendous source of new consumer intel for both
researchers at the Philly Fed and beyond. Researchers at the Philly Fed, for example,
have used the data to explore a range of topics, including the rapidly evolving student
loan market; the emergence of buy-now, pay-later programs; trends in home and auto
insurance markets; the evolution of sources of financial advice, and consumer attitudes
related to crypto.

Just this week, our researchers published a study using LIFE Survey data that
examines the divergence in spending growth between low- and high-income
consumers.3

These are just a few examples of our Consumer Finance Institute's work.

2 Robert Kelchen, Dubravka Ritter, and Douglas Webber, "Predicting College Closures and Financial Distress,"
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, December 1, 2024, https://www.philadelphiafed.org/consumer-
finance/education-finance/predicting-college-closures-and-financial-distress.
3 Tom Akana, "Evidence of Diverging Spending Behavior by Income," Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
November 2025, https://www.philadelphiafed.org/consumer-finance/evidence-of-diverging-spending-
behavior-by-income.

I would also like to recognize the conference organizing committee as well as give a
shout-out to all the authors of the fantastic papers that are being featured at the
conference. There were nearly a hundred very excellent submissions and 11 were
selected to be included in the conference.
The Consumer Finance Institute's enduring influence after 25 years underscores the
dedication of all of you as well as the ongoing significance of this work.
I'd like to thank Roc Armenter, Bob Hunt, and Julia Cheney for their leadership and also
extend my heartfelt thanks to all of you for attending this conference.
The Consumer Finance Institute would not be what it is today without our dedicated
staff and decades of collaboration with our academic and industry partners. We are so
grateful to have your support, whether you are joining us for the first time or have been
attending for years.
While I can't predict the topics that will be discussed at this conference 25 years from
now, I am confident that our collective efforts will continue to spark innovation and drive
important policy conversations that will help to make our economy and financial system
stronger.
Thank you once again for joining us today and tomorrow, and I hope you enjoy the rest
of the conference. I'll pass the mic back to Neil now for some quick logistics.
