# Navigating Unpredictable Terrain — williams — 2025-11-21

Introduction

Good morning. It’s a  pleasure be here to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Central  Bank of Chile. The topic of my remarks today is inflation targeting, which is  both an important part of Chile’s central banking history and a core foundation  of successful monetary policy.

Most central banks  around the world have adopted inflation targeting regimes over the past 35  years, and Chile was among those leading the way. Although specifics vary  across jurisdictions, these strategies share three principles: independence and  accountability, transparency and the clear communication of an inflation target,  and well-anchored inflation expectations, gained from the credibility that central  banks build over time. 1

Today I will discuss the  success of inflation targeting strategies in helping central banks achieve  price stability and better economic outcomes. I’ll also talk about how these  strategies were critically important in managing uncertainty after the onset of  the COVID-19 pandemic—and how they helped countries bring inflation down while  minimizing disruptions to financial markets and economies.

But first, I must give  the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and  do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or  others in the Federal Reserve System.

Autonomy, Transparency, and Confidence

Inflation targeting is  like guiding an excursion through the Andes. Independence gives the central  bank the ability to choose the best path to meet its objectives. Transparency ensures  that people understand where they are headed and why the route may change. And a  central bank earns public confidence by consistently reaching its goals, even  amid sudden detours and a jagged course, laying the groundwork for maintaining well-anchored  inflation expectations.

Inflation targeting strategies  were introduced and have evolved as central banks sought to avoid repeating  prior mistakes. Too often in the past, some central banks behaved as if they  were powerless to control inflation in the face of shocks. Over time, they found  they could be more successful at delivering price stability when they owned the  responsibility for that goal and had the independence of action and tools to  achieve it.

Transparency—including  clear communication of an explicit numerical inflation target—reinforces public  accountability for price stability and focuses the internal policy debate on  how best to attain that objective. The Central Bank of Chile established a 3  percent inflation target when it formally adopted its current framework in  1999. 2 And the Federal Reserve set  an inflation goal of 2 percent over the longer run, which it announced in an FOMC  statement in January 2012. 3

By communicating an  explicit inflation target—and then delivering inflation consistent with that goal—central  banks establish and reinforce trust with the public. But transparency does not  stop with declaring a destination. It also means describing the road ahead to  reach that goal. Many inflation-targeting central banks, including the Central  Bank of Chile, provide detailed analyses of their economic situations, outlooks,  and risks. 4

Transparency about  goals, strategy, and what that means for policy helps to anchor inflation  expectations, which, in turn, contributes to low and stable inflation. 5 , 6 The feedback loop  between effective policy actions and communications, well-anchored  expectations, and price stability is now a core tenet of modern central  banking. It short-circuits so-called second-round effects in wage and price  setting that exacerbate and prolong the effects of shocks.

Put to the Test

Inflation targeting  regimes were instrumental in bringing about a prolonged period of price stability  in many countries through 2020. But it wasn’t until the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic  that they were truly put to the test.

The pandemic, followed  by Russia’s war on Ukraine, dealt the most dramatic supply shocks to the world’s  economy in generations. Starting in 2021, global supply-chain disruptions,  along with acute imbalances between supply and demand, led to inflation  skyrocketing around the world. Inflation peaked at over 7 percent in the U.S. 7 and at over 14 percent in Chile. 8 Other Latin American  countries, as well as Canada and Europe, followed similar patterns.

While the sources of  inflation were comparable across countries, they affected countries  differently. For example, supply-chain bottlenecks and higher commodity prices  hit Chile and other countries especially hard. In addition, inflation  accelerated earlier and with greater force in Latin American countries than in  advanced economies. 9

In response, central  banks leaned into their inflation targeting strategies to guide their economies  to bring inflation down. Many benefited from the public trust built from years  of low and stable inflation. As a result, longer-term inflation expectations  remained well anchored in the U.S., Chile, and other Latin American countries. 10 This was  a key difference between this episode and bouts of high inflation in the past,  boding well for disinflation to occur.

The connections between  policy communications and actions, inflation outcomes, and expectations are at  the core of policy strategies that are robust to extreme uncertainty, a topic  that Athanasios Orphanides and I studied in a sequence of research papers. 11 If a central bank has  credibility in achieving price stability, longer-term expectations should  remain anchored at levels consistent with its inflation target.

Carving Their Own Paths

During my tenure at the  Fed, the comment I’ve heard most often from economists and central bankers in  emerging market countries is that the Fed’s actions have meaningful effects on  the capital flows and exchange rate movements in their countries. We saw this  in action during the so-called taper tantrum in mid-2013. After Fed Chairman  Ben Bernanke indicated that the FOMC might start tapering the pace of its asset  purchases later that year, U.S. Treasury yields rose sharply, causing  significant volatility in global financial markets—particularly for emerging  market economies.

What is striking to me  is that after the onset of the pandemic, those concerns were not nearly so top  of mind. Until COVID-19, central banks in emerging economies, including many in  Latin America, typically had followed the lead of the Fed when responding to  shocks. This time, because they did not want to risk a new episode of very high  inflation and thus potentially lose their hard-earned credibility, they moved  first. 12 Latin American central  banks acted quickly and decisively to tame high inflation by raising interest  rates, starting with Brazil in the spring of 2021, followed by Chile, Colombia,  Mexico, and Peru later that summer. 13 In contrast, central  banks of many advanced economies—including the Bank of England, the Federal  Reserve, the Bank of Canada, and the European Central Bank—raised rates later  and by smaller amounts.

Around the world,  inflation—and the responses of central banks—largely rose and fell along the  same path. Following central banks’ actions, inflation declined across  the board, and economies weathered the disinflation much better than  anticipated. And despite  big movements in interest rates across countries, disinflation occurred without  dramatic disruptions to capital flows, exchange rates, or financial markets. It’s  a true testament to the success of inflation targeting.

The Current Situation

This brings me to the  current situation. As I have emphasized, inflation targeting is a strategic  framework that provides the foundation for effective policy decisions and  communication. The decisions and actions themselves depend on the circumstances  that policymakers face.

Here in Chile, in the  United States, and across the globe, strong actions have proven effective at  restoring price stability. In some cases, inflation has returned comfortably  back to target levels, while in others, including the United States, the job of  bringing inflation sustainably back to target is not yet complete.

I’ll comment briefly on the current economic situation in the U.S. and what it means for monetary policy. Economic growth has slowed from its pace last year, and the labor market has gradually cooled. In particular, indicators of the balance between labor demand and supply, including the unemployment rate, have gradually softened over the past year, reaching levels seen prior to the pandemic when the labor market was not overheated. I would emphasize that this has been an ongoing, gradual process, without signs of a significant rise in layoffs or other indications of a sharp deterioration in the labor market.

Inflation declined from  a peak of 7-1/4 percent in mid-2022 to 2-3/4 percent in 2024. Looking back at  FOMC participants’ projections in December of last year, the median expectation  was for inflation to slow to 2-1/2 percent this year and approach 2 percent  next year. Since then, the effects of trade policies and other developments  have boosted U.S. inflation somewhat, offsetting the expected downward  trajectory. As a result, progress toward our 2 percent goal has temporarily  stalled, with the latest available data indicating that inflation remains  around 2-3/4 percent.

It is not possible to  measure the effects of trade policy actions on inflation with precision. My  estimate is that increased tariffs have contributed about one half to three  quarters of a percentage point to the current inflation rate. I do not see any  signs of tariffs contributing to second-round or other spillover effects on  inflation. In particular, inflation expectations are very well anchored, no  broad-based supply chain bottlenecks have emerged, labor markets are not  creating inflationary pressures, and wage growth has moderated. As a result, I  expect the effects of tariffs on inflation will play out over the rest of this  year and the first half of next year. Inflation should thereafter get back on  track to 2 percent in 2027.

Given this backdrop,  monetary policy is very focused on balancing the downside risks to our maximum  employment goal and the upside risks to price stability. My assessment is that  the downside risks to employment have increased as the labor market has cooled,  while the upside risks to inflation have lessened somewhat. Underlying  inflation continues to trend downward, absent any evidence of second-round  effects emanating from tariffs. For these reasons, I fully supported the FOMC’s  decisions to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis  points at each of its past two meetings.

Looking ahead, it is  imperative to restore inflation to our 2 percent longer-run goal on a sustained  basis. It is equally important to do so without creating undue risks to our  maximum employment goal. I view monetary policy as being modestly restrictive,  although somewhat less so than before our recent actions. Therefore, I still  see room for a further adjustment in the near term to the target range for the federal funds  rate to move the stance of policy closer to the range of neutral, thereby  maintaining the balance between the achievement of our two goals. My policy  views will, as always, be based on the evolution of the totality of the data,  the economic outlook, and the balance of risks to the achievement of our  maximum employment and price stability goals.

Conclusion

In conclusion, central  bank independence and accountability, clear communication and an explicit  inflation target, and well-anchored inflation expectations have proven to be  invaluable in ensuring price stability in the face of unexpected shocks and  extreme uncertainty.

Sharp turns and unpredictable  terrain have been an unavoidable part of our journey, and we must accept that  shocks and uncertainty will continue to define our future. I am confident that inflation  targeting strategies will continue to serve us well against any challenges we  may face ahead.
