# Resilience — williams — 2025-12-15

Introduction

Good morning, everyone.  It’s great to be here at the Liberty Science Center, home of the largest  planetarium in the Western Hemisphere. Typically, this would be the perfect opportunity  for me to discuss the star variables in economics. Alas, I’ll save that for the  Q&A.

Instead, I’m going to  talk to you today about the U.S. economy and how the Federal Reserve is working  to achieve its dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. I’ll  also discuss recent actions by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), and  I’ll give my economic outlook.

Before I go further, I  must give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine  alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the FOMC or others in the Federal  Reserve System.

Turning the Corner

One of the important  parts of my job is to travel throughout the Federal Reserve’s Second District.  It gives me the opportunity to meet with business, community, and government leaders  and get a firsthand and in-depth look at the challenges and opportunities facing  our region.

In recent years, North  Jersey has largely followed the trajectory of the broader U.S. economy: It was hit  hard by the pandemic, rebounded quickly, grappled with inflation, and then, over  the past year, faced heightened uncertainty stemming from geopolitical events  and changes in trade policy.

In fact, if I had to  choose one word to describe 2025, it is uncertainty. What’s striking is that despite  all the uncertainty, the U.S. economy has shown considerable resilience and  looks poised to pick up steam next year.

In other words, after  navigating through the challenges of 2025, we now appear to be turning the  corner. Of course, there’s always uncertainty about the road ahead—or, as we  say in Jersey, about what’s coming down the Turnpike. But over the past year, our  local, national, and even global economies have proven to be resilient. Here, that  resilience is called “Jersey Strong.”

Temporarily Stalled

Before I talk about what  I expect for the economy, I want to take a few minutes to tell you more about its  current state. I’ll focus on the two sides of the Fed’s dual mandate: maximum  employment and price stability.

I’ll start with price  stability, which the FOMC defines as 2 percent inflation 1 over the longer run. In  monetary policy, we rely on the totality of the data—and there is a lot of data.  While we haven’t had the normal flow of official data in recent months due to  the government shutdown, we are able to use a wide array of indicators to monitor  how the economy is doing.

What the data tell me is  that the effects of trade policies have boosted inflation this year, but these  effects have been more muted and drawn out than I originally anticipated. As a  result of the tariffs, progress toward the FOMC’s 2 percent longer-run  inflation goal has temporarily stalled, with the most recent inflation reading  of about 2-3/4 percent roughly unchanged from a year ago. While it is not  possible to precisely measure the effects of trade policy actions, my estimate  is that they have contributed around one half of a percentage point to the  current inflation rate.

I do not see any signs  of tariffs contributing to second-round or other spillover effects on inflation.  In particular, no broad-based supply chain bottlenecks have emerged, shelter  inflation has declined steadily, and measures of wage growth point to a  continued gradual slowing. This is consistent with reports from around the  Second District, where several of my business contacts have noted that, while  tariffs continue to drive up their input costs, the pace of price increases has  eased slightly.

Most importantly, inflation  expectations remain well anchored. The New York Fed’s Survey of Consumer  Expectations (SCE) continues to show that inflation expectations remain well  within their pre-Covid ranges. 2 This is something I watch  closely, because well-anchored expectations are critical to ensuring low and  stable inflation.

Gradual Cooling

Turning to the  employment side of our mandate, the data show that the labor market has  continued to cool, with labor demand softening more than supply. Job growth has  been anemic, and the unemployment rate has moved up steadily in recent months.  These trends are also occurring in North Jersey, where we've seen slight declines  in employment since January, and where many of our regional contacts, including  those responding to our business surveys, are reporting job losses.

In addition, survey-based  measures of the balance between demand and supply show increasing slack in the  labor market. In the Conference Board’s consumer confidence survey, a measure  of the difference between the share of respondents who think jobs are plentiful  and the share of those who think jobs are hard to get has declined throughout  2025. We have seen a similar pattern with the National Federation of  Independent Business’s survey measure of the difficulty in filling jobs. And  the SCE’s “job security gap” measure—defined as respondents’ job-finding  expectations minus their job-loss expectations—has fallen considerably this  year.

Many labor market indicators  are now at levels we saw prior to the pandemic, a time when the market was not  overheated. And although the labor market is clearly cooling, I should  emphasize that this has been an ongoing, gradual process, without signs of a  sharp rise in layoffs or other indications of rapid deterioration.

Monetary Policy and the Road Ahead

Looking ahead, it is  imperative that we restore inflation to our 2 percent longer-run goal on a  sustained basis. It is equally important to do so without creating undue risks  to our maximum employment goal. My assessment is that in recent months, the  downside risks to employment have increased as the labor market has cooled,  while the upside risks to inflation have lessened somewhat.

Monetary policy is very  focused on bringing these risks into balance. To that end, the FOMC has moved  the modestly restrictive stance of monetary policy toward neutral. At its  meeting last week, the FOMC decided to lower the target range for the federal  funds rate by 1/4 percentage point to 3-1/2 to 3-3/4 percent. The accompanying  FOMC statement said that “in considering the extent and timing of additional  adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will  carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of  risks.” 3 With these actions, monetary  policy is well positioned as we head into 2026.

Looking ahead, I expect tariffs  will have a largely one-off price level effect that will be fully realized in  2026. I anticipate inflation to decline to just under 2-1/2 percent next year before  reaching the FOMC’s longer-run 2 percent goal in 2027.

I expect real GDP growth  to be about 2-1/4 percent in 2026, well above my forecast for this year’s pace  of around 1-1/2 percent. This pickup is in part due to the effects of the  government shutdown, but it’s also fueled by tailwinds from fiscal policy,  favorable financial conditions, and increased investments in artificial intelligence.

And I expect the  unemployment rate to rise to around 4-1/2 percent at the end of this year, reflecting  some additional effects from the government shutdown. With my forecast of  above-trend GDP growth, I expect the unemployment rate to gradually come down  over the next few years.

Balance Sheet

Before I conclude, I’d  like to briefly comment on the Fed’s balance sheet. On December 1, the FOMC stopped  reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency  mortgage-backed securities. 4 With the  level of bank reserves now deemed to be ample, the FOMC decided to initiate  reserve management purchases to maintain an ample level of reserves. This is  the natural next step in the implementation of our ample reserves framework to  ensure effective interest rate control. 5

With the steady decline  in the level of reserves, we have observed upward pressure on repo rates at  times in recent months. 6 When this  occurs, the Fed’s standing repo operations can act as a shock absorber by  capping pressures on money market rates resulting from strong liquidity demand  or market stress. 7 I fully  expect that standing repo operations will continue to be actively used in this  way.

Conclusion

So, after a year of  uncertainty, we will be starting 2026 from a place of resilience. The economy  is poised to return to solid growth and price stability.

But, as 2025 has shown, the  road may shift in unpredictable ways. In assessing the future path of monetary  policy, my views, as always, will be based on the evolution of the totality of  the data, the economic outlook, and the balance of risks to the achievement of  our maximum employment and price stability goals. We must be ready to adjust  our route as needed to reach our destination.
