# Prepare for the Unexpected — williams — 2025-10-03

Thank you for the kind  introduction. It’s a great honor to speak at this event recognizing our esteemed  colleague and friend, Klaas Knot.

As is often the case  among central bankers, Klaas and I first met on a rubber raft floating down the  Snake River in Wyoming’s Grand Teton National Park. It was August 2011. Klaas  was a rookie monetary policymaker at the time, having been in his role as  president of the Dutch National Bank for less than two months. I, on the other  hand, was a relatively grizzled veteran with nearly six months under my belt as  president of the San Francisco Fed.

While we were leisurely cruising  downstream, enjoying the wonderful views of nature, our raft suddenly came upon  a black bear and two cubs who were—equally leisurely—crossing the river right  ahead of us. Carefully, the raft pilot steered us near enough to the bears for  close-up photos, but not so near as to get between the mama bear and her cubs—the  one thing even a city slicker like me knows never to do. We didn’t appreciate it  at the time, but this adventure was an omen for the many challenges we would  face navigating the unexpected in the years to come.

Since that momentous raft  trip, I have had the great privilege of working closely with Klaas as he wore  his various hats: as president of the Dutch National Bank, as a member of the  board at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), and in the leadership  roles he held at the Financial Stability Board (FSB).

In all the years I have  known Klaas, I have been impressed by the consistently high standards to which  he holds himself and others. A high standard of grounding decisions in principles  and strategy. A high standard of disciplined and impartial thought and analysis,  one in which the evidence leads to the conclusion rather than the other way  around. And a high standard of clear and concise communication—often with quintessentially  Dutch directness. I experienced all of these high standards firsthand at many BIS  meetings, when Klaas respectfully but pointedly probed my analysis or  conclusions.

Today, I will do my best  to meet Klaas’s high standards as I describe key principles that have been  critically important for successful monetary policy in the past and are  essential for navigating the uncertain waters ahead. To cut to the chase, when  it comes to monetary policy, central banks must prepare for the unexpected.

Before I go further, I  need to provide the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are  mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market  Committee (FOMC) or others in the Federal Reserve System.

Expect the Unexpected

A key lesson of the past  20 years is to expect the unexpected. Over that period, we’ve faced the global  financial crisis, the euro crisis, the long period of zero or even negative  interest rates, COVID-19, Russia’s war on Ukraine, and most recently, seismic  shifts in the global trade and geopolitical environment.

Unpredictable change and  uncertainty will certainly continue to be with us for the foreseeable future. Consider,  for example, the effects of ongoing global demographic shifts, artificial  intelligence, and potentially transformative innovations in our financial  systems.

If history teaches us to  expect the unexpected, then what does that mean for monetary policy? First and  foremost, it underscores the need for principles and strategy that provide the  foundation for decision-making across a wide range of circumstances. This does  not mean a playbook for every conceivable situation—that is doomed to fail. Instead,  it is a consistent overarching strategy that shapes and informs decision-making.  Second, it means having the ability and readiness to act as needed for any  situation that arises. Third, it implies being clear-eyed and disciplined in  adapting to and communicating the changing economic landscape and resulting  policy trade-offs and decisions. It’s important to be  nimble in execution even as one is steady in strategy.

I  am happy to say that all three of these features are foundational to the recent  reviews of monetary policy frameworks conducted by the European Central Bank  and the Federal Reserve, as well as policy frameworks used by many other  central banks. 1

So far, I have stayed at  a very high level. I will now get into some specifics of how these observations  translate into real-world practice. I will organize this discussion across three  broad categories, corresponding to three key principles of successful monetary  policy: accountability, transparency, and well-anchored inflation expectations. 2

Owning  the Responsibility

I will start with  accountability: Central banks must own the  responsibility to deliver price stability and have the independence of  action and the ability to achieve it.

In the distant past,  many central bankers believed that monetary policy could only play a minor role  in reducing inflation, while others thought that inflation was completely  outside of their control. 3 The end  result was persistently high inflation and economic stagnation. History has taught  us that central banks can be more successful at delivering sustainably low  inflation when they are accountable for their decisions and can act independently. 4 , 5 Today, central bankers  around the world recognize that attaining and maintaining price stability is  their job to do.

But it is not enough to  be accountable and independent: central banks must have the appropriate tools  to carry out their mandates. Outside of the hallways of central banks, monetary  policy is commonly understood through the overly narrow lens of setting the current  short-term interest rate. All the attention is on what the ECB, the Fed, or another  central bank will “do” at its next policy meeting.

Of course, this focus is  not entirely surprising since central banks generally use the short-term  interest rate as the primary policy instrument. And the academic literature,  including the Taylor Rule and all of its variants, has reinforced this notion that  equates monetary policy to setting of the short-term rate. Indeed, there even has  been a label attached to it: “conventional monetary policy.” By implication,  other monetary policy actions that have been used—such as forward guidance and  balance sheet policies—are deemed “unconventional,” and therefore somewhat  suspect.

However, this narrow understanding  of monetary policy is alien to the history of monetary economics and central  bank practice. A reading of Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz’s pathbreaking  history of the Federal Reserve during the Great Depression dispels the notion  that monetary policy is limited to setting the short-term rate and instead  emphasizes broader measures of liquidity and longer-term interest rates. 6 The same is true for Alan  Meltzer’s detailed history of the Federal Reserve. 7

In this regard, I am  reminded of Ben Bernanke’s speech from 2002, titled “On Milton Friedman's  Ninetieth Birthday.” In it, Ben provided a clear and succinct overview of the  Friedman and Schwartz critique of Federal Reserve policy during the Great  Depression. 8 Of particular note is the example of the spring of 1932, when the Fed briefly  engaged in open market purchases to support broad liquidity, which was  beginning to have an effect on the economy. But this policy was soon abandoned,  as the Fed reverted to the view that the low level of nominal interest rates  indicated an expansionary monetary policy. Ben famously finished the speech by  acknowledging these mistakes. And he promised not to repeat them—a vow he would  soon uphold through leading the Fed’s actions during the global financial  crisis.

Around the same time,  and well before “unconventional” policies had that name, monetary economists  from different schools of thought—including Ben McCallum, Athanasios Orphanides  and Volker Wieland, Gauti Eggertsson and Mike Woodford, Ben Bernanke and Vicent  Reinhart, Alan Auerbach and Maury Obstfeld, and my own work with Dave  Reifschneider 9 —described  how monetary policy could be effective even in situations where nominal short-term  rates were very low. These are not “emergency,” “crisis,” or “break-the-glass”  policies, but those that are well within the long tradition of monetary theory  and practice. Of course, how and when to use policies depends on the circumstances  and the risks policymakers are facing. But this is a matter of tactics and  implementation, not of principle or strategy.

Commitment to Transparency

The second principle is  transparency—including the clear communication of a central bank’s framework,  an explicit numerical longer-run inflation target, and the reasoning behind  policy decisions.

For central banks,  transparency enhances accountability and keeps them clearly focused on  achieving their goals. For households and businesses, an explicit and credible  inflation target helps take some of the uncertainty off the table so they can  focus on planning for their future. By improving the public’s understanding of  a central bank’s goals and actions, the central bank can enhance the  effectiveness of monetary policy at stabilizing inflation and the economy. 10 , 11 , 12

Based on a foundation of  clear goals and strategy, central banks are better able to communicate their  thinking behind policy decisions and how they relate to policy goals. This is  often done through economic forecasts, reports, and speeches. Transparency around  the factors that influence policy decisions can, in turn, improve the public’s  understanding of the policy reaction function, thereby enhancing the  effectiveness of policy. 13 Indeed, many central  banks have increasingly provided detailed macroeconomic analyses of factors  relevant for monetary policy, including staff or policymaker estimates of the  output gap and the natural rate of interest. 14

There is no single best  way to achieve transparency—this is not one size fits all. Instead, the  approach must conform to the institutional structures and practical realities  of each jurisdiction. The Monetary Policy Reports of the Riksbank and Norges  Bank, to name two examples, provide very clear summaries of the views of their  policy committees, including their assessments of the distribution of the path  of future interest rates. 15 In contrast, central  banks with large committees or a mix of internal and external members have not  done so. Such differences across central banks may be more a feature than a  bug: One of the benefits of greater transparency and the variety of different  practices is that we can all learn from each other’s experiences as we strive  to further improve communications consistent with our institutional structures  and needs.

Importance of Inflation Expectations

The third key principle of  successful monetary policy is well-anchored inflation expectations. This  principle has become a bedrock of modern central banking, as economic analysis  and history have shown that anchoring inflation expectations is important in  maintaining low and stable inflation. 16 , 17

Well-anchored inflation  expectations short-circuit so-called second-round effects in wage and price  setting that exacerbate and prolong the impacts of the kinds of shocks we saw  during the 1970s. They also create a more favorable short-run trade-off in achieving  inflation and employment objectives. 18

Central banks help  anchor expectations by owning the responsibility to deliver price stability,  publicly committing to an explicit inflation target, and taking the actions  needed to ensure price stability. The connections  between policy communications and actions, inflation outcomes, and expectations  are at the core of robust policy strategies. 19

Unlike  the stylized textbook model of monetary policy, a robust policy approach  recognizes that the economy is changing and uncertain. It also views the  anchoring of expectations, or the lack thereof, as the outcome of monetary  policy actions and communications, not an assumed fact.

When the Facts Change

I have talked about the importance of three key principles: ownership of price  stability and independence of action, transparency about goals and strategy,  and a focus on anchored inflation expectations. But like that family of black  bears on the Snake River, the unexpected is always waiting around the bend. These principles and lessons provide a strong foundation for monetary policy  that prepares us for the unexpected challenges and uncertainties we face ahead.

Thank you.
