# Summer of ’25: The Data — williams — 2025-07-16

Introduction

Good evening. I’m pleased to see my fellow economists and  colleagues enjoying a long summer evening in the city in the best way  possible—indoors and prepared for a robust discussion on the economic outlook.

I’ve been looking forward to this conversation for some time. But  before we turn to the discussion and Q&A, I’d like to take a few minutes at  the start of the program to share my assessment of recent economic data and how  it’s informing my outlook for the economy. Particularly, I’ll explain what the  data are telling us in light of economic uncertainty, and how I expect the  effects of tariffs to take shape.

Now is when I must give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views  I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the  Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or others in the Federal Reserve System.

Soft  Data/Hard Data

You all read the news and are familiar with the facts and figures.  The changing landscape around trade policy has heightened economic uncertainty  among households, businesses, and financial market participants. The response  to these developments and the associated uncertainty has led to interesting and  sometimes contrasting dynamics in both the soft data and hard data.

Soft data, such as the regional business surveys conducted by the  New York Fed, have highlighted an elevated degree of uncertainty about the  economic outlook over the past few months. All told,  concerns about tariffs have been widespread, resulting in a reported pullback  on capital spending.

Similarly, our national Survey of Consumer Expectations (SCE)  shows that consumers’ uncertainty along a number of dimensions remains elevated  as well, leading many households to scale back on their expected spending  growth on nonessential items. 1 In  addition, survey respondents report that their uncertainty about future  inflation remains elevated.

But some soft data have provided more encouraging news. For  example, in the SCE, longer-run inflation expectations have remained stable, while  short- and medium-term inflation expectations have returned to their  pre-pandemic ranges. This is critically important, because well-anchored  inflation expectations are essential for sustained price stability.

Now I’ll turn to some hard data. And by these measures, the U.S.  economy remains in a good place.

Real GDP growth data have been unusually noisy, largely reflecting  effects from the front-running of tariffs earlier this year. That said, the  data are suggesting that economic growth has slowed relative to last year’s  pace.

All of this data—both hard and soft—feed into my assessment of how  the economy is faring with regard to the Fed’s dual mandate goals of maximum  employment and price stability.

On the employment front, the most recent data show a solid labor  market, as demonstrated by measures of unemployment, employment, vacancies,  hiring, and quits. Job growth is slowing, but so is labor supply, owing to  lower immigration. Overall, labor supply and demand are well balanced and there  are no signs that the labor market is adding inflationary pressures.

With regard to price stability, inflation has continued on a gradual, albeit bumpy downward path toward our 2 percent longer-run goal. Based on my reading of the June CPI and PPI data, I estimate that the 12-month percent change in headline PCE inflation in June will be about 2-1/2 percent, and core inflation will be about 2-3/4 percent.

The  Effects of Tariffs

I often say that I look at the totality of the data to track  underlying trends and evolving conditions. So, in addition to closely watching  the data and trends that I just mentioned, I’ve been keenly watching the  effects of tariffs on the prices of goods and services.

One question comes up a lot these days: “All we hear about is  tariffs, tariffs, tariffs. But then why hasn’t inflation gone up?”

To answer this question, you need to dig into the details of how  tariffs affect prices, and that means getting into the data at a more granular  level.

We are seeing initial effects of tariff increases on core  goods prices. Specifically, for items that are more exposed to higher  tariffs—household appliances, musical instruments, luggage, tableware—price  increases so far this year have been well above what one would expect based on  past trends. Using granular import price data and linkages measured through  input-output tables, we can see if these patterns occur broadly across  categories of goods and services. 2 And  in fact, there is a positive relationship between a category’s exposure to  tariffs and its price increase to date this year relative to its prior trend.

It's important to note that it’s still early days for the effects  of tariffs, which take time to come into full force. Combining enacted and  announced tariffs, estimates of the resulting average effective tariff rate  range somewhere between 15 and 20 percent. But actual tariffs in effect in  recent months were much smaller than that, as seen by the amount of tariff  revenue collected each month. Net tariff receipts as a share of imports rose  from about 2-1/4 percent in the first three months of the year to about 8  percent in May.

On top of that, it takes time for the tariff increases to pass  through to domestic prices. In particular, businesses and consumers bought  imported goods in droves in anticipation of the higher tariff rates, likely delaying  their effects on domestic prices.

Nonetheless, businesses are very focused on tariffs and say that  they expect to respond by increasing prices. A special New York Fed survey of  businesses indicates that firms passed on at least some of the higher tariffs  to their customers, with nearly a third of manufacturers and about 45 percent  of service firms fully passing along all tariff-induced cost increases by  raising their prices. 3

All in all, although we are only seeing relatively modest effects  of tariffs in the hard aggregate data so far, I expect those effects to  increase in coming months. Overall, I expect tariffs to boost inflation by  about 1 percentage point over the second half of this year and the first part  of next year.

Another element to the inflation outlook is that the lower foreign  exchange value of the dollar we have seen this year likely will add somewhat to  inflationary pressure going forward.

We won’t know exactly the magnitude or timing of how these various  factors will play out until we see more data. That’s why I’ll continue to be  vigilant and monitor prices and broad movements over time to best assess  evolving conditions.

Monetary  Policy

The combination of continued uncertainty, a solid labor market,  and inflation still above our 2 percent goal led the FOMC to decide to leave  the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 percent  at its most recent meeting last month. 4

Maintaining this modestly restrictive stance of monetary policy is  entirely appropriate to achieve our maximum employment and price stability  goals. It allows for time to closely analyze incoming data, assess the evolving  outlook, and evaluate the balance of risks to achieving our dual mandate goals.

In addition, the FOMC continues to reduce its holdings of Treasury  securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities. That process  continues to go very smoothly.

The  Economic Outlook

I’ll conclude my remarks with the question that likely brought you  all here this evening. What is my outlook for the economy?

Given all the uncertainty, a number of outcomes are possible. But  based on what the data tell us today, I expect uncertainty and tariffs to  restrain spending and reduced immigration to slow labor force growth. As a  result, I expect real GDP growth this year to be about 1 percent.

With this slowdown in growth, I expect the unemployment rate to  rise to around 4-1/2 percent by the end of this year. I anticipate inflation will come in between 3 and 3-1/2 percent in 2025, and then fall back to about 2-1/2 percent  next year before reaching 2 percent in 2027.

Conclusion

As the summer progresses and we look toward the remainder of the  year and beyond, I’ll remain focused on all of the data—the soft data  from surveys, the hard data we see in the real GDP growth and consumer  spending, and tariffs’ effects on goods and services—and what it ultimately means  for the achievement of our dual mandate goals.

There’s definitively heightened uncertainty about the path of the  economy, but it’s too early to say what the trajectory of the hard data will  be. No matter what the future holds, I am committed to supporting maximum  employment and returning inflation to our 2 percent longer-run goal.

Thank you for hosting me this evening. I look forward to your  questions.
